The universities are not yet universal

They don't allow every kind of
intelligence, they don't accept all manifestations of intelligence

------

First, one needs intelligence and clarity. Don't be worried about it. Don't start thinking
that if you are. not intelligent then what? Everybody is born intelligent. Intelligence is an
intrinsic quality -- just as everybody is born breathing, everybody is born intelligent.
The idea that a few people are intelligent and a few are not is utterly wrong -- and has
been dehumanizing many many people -- is very insulting, degrading. All are born
intelligent, although their intelligences may differ in their expressions. One is intelligent in
music, another is intelligent in mathematics, but if you make mathematics the criterion then
the musician looks unintelligent. If you put them both into one examination where
mathematics is the criterion, the musician fails. Change the criterion, let music be the
criterion, and put them both into the examination where music will decide, then the
mathematician looks stupid.
We have chosen certain criteria; that's why many people have been condemned as stupid
-- they are not. I have never come across a single person who is stupid -- it does not happen --
but his intelligence may be a different kind of intelligence. Poetry needs a different kind of
intelligence than being in business. A poet cannot be a businessman, and the businessman
will find it very difficult to be a poet. One kind of intelligence is needed in being a politician,
another kind of intel-ligence is needed in being a painter. And there are millions of
possibilities.
Remember: everyone is born intelligent, so that is not debarring anybody. You just have
to find your intelligence -- where it is. And once you have found your intelligence you will be
clear.
People are living with unclarity because they are living with wrong ideas about
themselves. Somebody has told you -- a schoolmaster, a headmaster, a university -- that you
are not intelligent. But their criterion is only a chosen criterion; their criterion is not
applicable to all. The universities are not yet universal. They don't allow every kind of
intelligence, they don't accept all manifestations of intelligence.
Once you have accepted your intelligence and you start respecting it, you will become
clear; there will be no problem.
The poet feels stupid because he cannot be a good businessman. Now this creates
confusion. He becomes inferior in his own eyes, disrespectful, condemning. He tries to
succeed in business but he cannot. This creates great smoke around him. If he simply
understands that he is a poet and he is not meant to be a businessman, and to succeed as a
businessman will be a suicide to him, he has to succeed as a poet... That is his intelligence,
and his intelligence has to flower in his own way. He has not to imitate anybody else. Maybe
the society will not pay for it, because poetry is not needed as much as bombs are needed.
Love is not needed as much as hatred is needed.
That's why in the films, on the radio, on the television, murder is allowed; it is not called
obscene. But love-making is not allowed; it is called obscene. This society lives through hate
not through love. If somebody is murdering, it is perfectly okay. If somebody puts a dagger
into your heart and the blood rushes like a fountain, it is perfectly okay. But if somebody
hugs you, kisses you, loves you, the society is afraid.
This is strange that love is obscene and murder is not, that lovers are condemned and
soldiers rewarded, that war is right and love is wrong.
If you accept your intelligence, if you accept yourself, you will become clear, absolutely
clear; all clouds will disappear.

-------

PLEASE EXPLAIN ABOUT BLISS AND MISERY,FOR WHENEVER I
ENCOUNTER LOVE OR BEAUTY, I ONLY FEEL TREMENDOUS PAIN BUT NOT
BLISS, AND I DON'T UNDERSTAND THIS.
Suparna, you have been told again and again, you have been taught again and again, that
to be joyous is wrong and to be miserable is right. You may not have been told so directly,
but indirectly you have been conditioned and hypnotized for misery. You have started
believing that misery is natural. You see misery all around, misery abounds, everybody is
miserable. It seems to be the way things are.
When you were born, you were a happy child -- as every child is happy. It has not
happened otherwise, never. Whenever a child is born he is happy, utterly happy. And that's
why children look very selfish: they only think of themselves, they are not worried about the
world. And they are happy about small things. A butterfly in the garden, and the utter joy and
their wonder -- at small things, at nothings; but they are happy, they are naturally happy.
But slowly slowly we cripple their happiness, we destroy it. We cannot tolerate so much
happiness. The world is very miserable and we have to prepare them for the world. So
indirectly we start indoctrinating them that 'The world is misery,' that 'You cannot afford to
be happy,' that 'Happiness is just a hope, how can you be happy? Don't be so selfish! There is
so much misery all around -- feel for others, consider others.' Slowly slowly the child gets the
feeling that to be happy is a kind of sin. How can you be happy when the world is in such
misery?
People write letters to me asking: 'How can you teach people meditation when the world
is in such a misery? How can one be happy when people are starving?' As if by being
unhappy you will help them! As if by not being meditative you will be of any kind of service
to them! As if wars will disappear If you don't meditate, and poverty will disappear if you are
not happy!
But misery has been put on a pedestal, misery has been worshipped. I always suspect that
Christianity became the greatest religion because of the cross. It represents misery, suffering.
Krishna could not become a great religion because of his flute because of his dance. Even
those who worship him feel a little guilty about him. How can you be so happy and dancing
with girlfriends? And not just one -- thousands! And singing and playing on the flute! And
people are dying and there is death and starvation and war and violence and all kinds of
things are going around. It is hell, and you are playing on your flute! It seems callous, it
seems cruel. Jesus seems to be more suitable, dying on the cross. Look at the face of Jesus!
The way Christians have painted him his face is very long, sad. He is carrying the whole
burden of the earth. He has come to take all the sins of all the people on himself. He seems to
be the greatest servant -- very unselfish.
But my feeling is that Christians have depicted Christ wrongly. This Christ is a myth, the
real Christ was more like Krishna. In fact, if you go deep down into the word 'Christ' you will
be surprised: it comes from 'Krishna'; its root is 'Krishna'. He must have been a very joyous
man, otherwise how can you think of him eating, drinking, making merry? There are so many
scenes where friends have gathered and they are eating and drinking and gossipping. He is
not always 'gospelling', sometimes he is gossipping too! And he seems to be the only
messenger from God who drinks and eats well and enjoys the small pleasures of life. My
feeling is that if Zen Masters were to create a religion out of Jesus, they would make him
laugh on the cross -- a belly laugh. Jesus would have as big a belly as Bodhidharma! And the
belly would be shaking like an earthquake with great laughter! And that would have been
more true, far more true.
Even in Japan and China the statue of the Buddha is made with a big belly. In India they
don't make that big belly, no, not at all. The Indian concept, the yogic concept is that the belly
has to be very small and the chest has to be big, because the yogic breathing is a false
breathing, it is not natural. It can make a Mohammed Ali out of you but not a Buddha. It will
give you the shape of a Mr Universe, but have you seen any other kinds of people in the
world who are more ugly? Mr Universe seems to be the ugliest. I don't think any woman can
fall in love with a Mr Universe. He looks so animalistic -- all muscles and no man, just a kind
of mechanism. Just see his muscles moving -- just a kind of mechanism, a machine, but no
soul! The Indian statue of Buddha is the yogic statue. When they made Buddha's statue in
China, they made it with a big belly.
When one laughs and when one breathes naturally, the belly becomes slowly bigger,
because then one breathes from the belly and not from the chest -- the breath goes the whole
way down. If Zen were to make a religion out of Christianity Jesus would be on the cross, but
with laughter, such laughter that it would resound down the centuries. But that may not have
been a successful religion, because how would it suit the people who know only crying and
weeping? He would look completely eccentric, outlandish. To be on the cross and sad looks
perfectly right, because everybody is on a certain cross and sad.
And you must have been taught from your very childhood that the world is a wrong place.
How can you be happy in this place? We are suffering a kind of punishment. God ordered
Adam and Eve to leave paradise because they disobeyed, and humanity is under that curse.
How can you be happy? To be a Christian and happy will be a contradiction in terms.
So, Suparna, you must have been taught that the world is a miserable place; misery is
perfectly right in it, in tune with it. And everybody is miserable; it will be very hard and cruel
on your part to be happy and joyous. That's why people feel guilty and hold back even when
there are moments to enjoy.